shaper: Control plane shaping (#706)
opnsense/docs: source/manual/how-tos/shaper_control_plane.rst

==================================================
Control Plane Shaping
==================================================

Planes of Operation, is concept to describe and divide the functionality 
of a network device.

In essence the concept creates logical layers into which are categorized packets 
per their use and type.

There are 3 Planes:

1. **The control plane**
  

>    Affect the operationability of the network.

Author: Thank you! I this word specifically broke my mind

   the RIB, routing updates, in addition to other protocols such as PIM, IGMP, ICMP, ARP, BFD, LACP, and so on. 
   In short, the control plane is responsible for maintaining sessions and exchanging protocol information with other router or network devices.

2. **The management plane**
     
   Affect the manageability of the network.
     
   The management plane is used to manage a device through its connection to the network. 
   Examples of protocols processed in the management plane include Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), 
   Telnet, File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Secure FTP, and Secure Shell (SSH). 
   These management protocols are used for monitoring and for command-line interface (CLI) access.

3. **The data plane**
     
   Affect the applications of the user.
     
   The data plane is the forwarding plane, which is responsible for the switching of packets through the router. 
   

Necessity of Control Plane Shaping
----------------------------------

Control plane is a necessary component for the network operation.
A congested state of the network, if control plane is not taken care of, will result in network disruptions. 

> In order to guarantee operation and non-disruption in such events, we can take advantage of QoS in our case Shaping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to guarantee operation and avoid disruption in such events, we can take advantage of Traffic Shaping
```

> **Its necessary to understand Control plane as such, needs to be always taken care of, always in its own dedicated way.**

Reviewer: (following up on previous sentence)

```suggestion
**With Shaping, we can reserve dedicated bandwidth for the control plane**
```

.. Attention::

>     Control plane should not share a class (Pipe nor Queue) with any other traffic type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The control plane should not share a class (Pipe or Queue) with any other traffic type.
```

Configuring Control plane for OPNsense
--------------------------------------

> Configuration will take in account existence of already configured shaper as per how-tos/shaper_bufferbloat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration will take into account the existence of an already configured shaper as per :doc:`how-tos/shaper_bufferbloat`
```

(please test the above link when compiled)

Author: @swhite2 @Monviech 
The docs got compiled, and I checked if the link works but is not, basically its not even represented as a link.

Is this something you guys can quickly fix? :)

Reviewer: @SeimusS Should be https://github.com/opnsense/docs/commit/284f78ffc48f134c3675cbe1bf82189d7f9f7ce4, thanks for checking :)

In the configuration steps below, assume these tuned speeds:

+----------------+----------+-----------------+
|                | Download |      Upload     |
+================+==========+=================+
|      Mbit/s    |   495    |        30       |
+----------------+----------+-----------------+

Bandwidth allocation requirements for Control plane:

+----------------+----------+-----------------+
|    1% of BW    | Download |      Upload     |
+================+==========+=================+

> |      Mbit/s    |    5     |       0.5       |

Reviewer 2: Cannot enter 0.5 Mbit/s into the pipe BW field.  Maybe change the example values, or the units to kbit/s?

Author: done, thanks for the input!

+----------------+----------+-----------------+

The 1% is the default lowest value. Its subjected to be increased if needed.

.. Attention::

>     BW given to a different Pipe needs to be subtracted from already existing one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    BW given to a different Pipe needs to be subtracted from already existing ones.
```

Create Control-plane-IPv6-Queue For Download
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
========================= ================================= ==============================================================================
 **enabled**              Checked                           *Check to enable the queue*
 **pipe**                 Control-plane-Pipe-Download       *Select our Pipe*
 **weight**               100                               *The higher weight the higher the ratio of BW a queue gets*
 **mask**                 (none)                            *Leave empty for a queue*
 **Enable CoDel**         (empty)                           *Leave empty for a queue*
 **(FQ-)CoDel target**    (empty)                           *Leave empty for a queue*
 **(FQ-)CoDel interval**  (empty)                           *Leave empty for a queue*
 **(FQ-)CoDel ECN**       (empty)                           *Leave empty for a queue*
 **description**          Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Download *Free field, enter something descriptive*
========================= ================================= ==============================================================================

.. Note::

>         Using WFQ or QFQ and weights, we can tell how much BW will get each control plane for each protocol gain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Using WFQ or QFQ and weights, we can tell how much BW each protocol control plane will get.
```

Step 2b - Create Upload Queue
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
On the **Queues** tab click the **+** button in the lower right corner.
An empty **Edit queue** screen pops up.

Follow the same process as for the Download queue, 
selecting the **"Control-plane-Pipe-Upload**,
and entering "Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Upload" for the **description**

Step 3a - Create Download Rule
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> On the **Rules** tab click the **+** button in the lower right corner.

Reviewer: fwiw, in the long run, `ipfw` rules might not be the preferred choice anymore to do this. In theory a separate rule in `pf` for i.e. ipv6-icmp should achieve the same (verifiying this would be even better).

Author: I am not going to deny that I didn't consider it. But isn't that feature considered yet Experimental?

Reviewer: It is, although adoption of pf-based shaping would be good to eventually get it out of that state, so maybe an honorable mention or "tip"?

Author: Definitely at minimum a honorable mention would be on place which is not problem to add.

But I think it would be even better to to have it as optional approach with example

(Optional) Step 3c - Create Download Rule
(Optional) Step 3d - Create Upload Rule

* However here comes the question how to do it properly considering the default inbuilt OPNsense IPv6 rules?
* Do we need in such case only one rule in one direction specified on WAN, example IN rule?
* And than specify Queues in Traffic shaping/rule direction & Traffic shaping/reverse direction within the same rule? Example:
         Traffic Shaping (rule direction): Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Download
         Traffic Shaping (reverse direction): Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Upload
* Or separate in out rule is needed with specific shaper direction?
* Will be those rules even hit, as the default IPv6 ICMPv6 rules are quick and floating?

Reviewer: > However here comes the question how to do it properly considering the default inbuilt OPNsense IPv6 rules?

Good point, someting we'll have to think about, but the use case hadn't popped up yet.

> Do we need in such case only one rule in one direction specified on WAN, example IN rule?

Since the pf rules are stateful by default, the "opposite" direction option (in the rule edit) is used to replicate the behavior of a second rule in `ipfw`. This can be a queue or a pipe, if a queue is selected, the associated pipe is used as well.

Author: > Good point, someting we'll have to think about, but the use case hadn't popped up yet.

Hehe, looks like now we have a potential use case, and actually one that could be one most the most common.

One way how to do it, would be to remove those default rules and manually set them. But..
A. too intrusive
B. not a good approach
C. will cause a lot of problems for users

> Since the pf rules are stateful by default, the "opposite" direction option (in the rule edit) is used to replicate the behavior of a second rule in `ipfw`. This can be a queue or a pipe, if a queue is selected, the associated pipe is used as well.

Aaaah interesting. 

If the Traffic Shaping field is populated in the pf rule, the rule is only used to classify traffic into a Pipe or Queue?
Or does it as well perform deny,refuse,permit actions as a rule without Traffic Shaping field?

Reviewer: > If the Traffic Shaping field is populated in the pf rule, the rule is only used to classify traffic into a Pipe or Queue?
>  Or does it as well perform deny,refuse,permit actions as a rule without Traffic Shaping field?

It does everything as it normally would according to the pf rule. I don't think the packet is in any way touched by shaping if it is blocked. Therefore, you'd see pipes/queues configured on pass rules.

Author: > > However here comes the question how to do it properly considering the default inbuilt OPNsense IPv6 rules?
> 
> Good point, someting we'll have to think about, but the use case hadn't popped up yet.

Thinking about this,

Ideas:
1. The only possible way from user perspective, would be to recreate those rules as floating quick and set them above the default rules.

2. Currently the default rules are non editable, what if they were? In that case a user could just set in the proper Queue or Pipe.

3. Maybe a bit wishful, but what if OPNsense came out of the box with pre-configured Control Plane Shaper/class into which the default rules would be already configured?

 **target**            Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Download *Select the Download queue*
 **description**       Control-plane-IPv6-Rule-Download  *Enter a descriptive name*
====================== ================================= ======================================================================================================

Step 3b - Create Upload Rule
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
On the **Rules** tab click the **+** button in the lower right corner.
An empty **Edit rule** screen pops up.

Follow the same process as for the Download rule, 
using the same values except:

- **sequence** (set to 2); 
- **direction** (set to "out")
- **target** (set to "Control-plane-IPv6-Queue-Upload");
- **description** (set to "Control-plane-IPv6-Rule-Upload")

.. Attention::
    The sequences needs to be at least 1 less than the default any rules or rules that would catch this traffic type 
    and you may need to adjust the other rule sequence values accordingly.

Step 4 - Finalizing the configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Now press |apply| to activate the traffic shaping rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now press **Apply** to activate the traffic shaping rules.
```
